---
layout: post
title: "Apache Arrow 0.14.0 Release"
date: "2019-07-02 00:00:00 -0600"
author: pmc
categories: [release]
---
<!--
{% comment %}
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

The Apache Arrow team is pleased to announce the 0.14.0 release. This
covers 3 months of development work and includes [**602 resolved
issues**][1] from [**75 distinct contributors**][2].  See the Install
Page to learn how to get the libraries for your platform. The
[complete changelog][3] is also available.

This post will give some brief highlights in the project since the
0.13.0 release from April.

## New committers

Since the 0.13.0 release, the following have been added:

* [Neville Dipale][5] was added as a committer
* [François Saint-Jacques][6] was added as a committer
* [Praveen Kumar][7] was added as a committer

Thank you for all your contributions!

## Upcoming 1.0.0 Format Stability Release

We are planning for our next major release to move from 0.14.0 to
1.0.0. The major version number will indicate stability of the Arrow
columnar format and binary protocol. While the format has already been
stable since December 2017, we believe it is a good idea to make this
stability official and to indicate that it is safe to persist
serialized Arrow data in applications. This means that applications
will be able to safely upgrade to new Arrow versions without having to
worry about backwards incompatibilities. We will write in a future
blog post about the stability guarantees we intend to provide to help
application developers plan accordingly.

## Packaging

We added support for the following platforms:

* Debian GNU/Linux buster
* Ubuntu 19.04

We dropped support for Ubuntu 14.04.

## Development Infrastructure and Tooling

As the project has grown larger and more diverse, we are increasingly
outgrowing what we can test in public continuous integration services
like Travis CI and Appveyor. In addition, we share these resources
with the entire Apache Software Foundation, and given the high volume
of pull requests into Apache Arrow, maintainers are frequently waiting
many hours for the green light to merge patches.

The complexity of our testing is driven by the number of different
components and programming languages as well as increasingly long
compilation and test execution times as individual libraries grow
larger. The 50 minute time limit of public CI services is simply too
limited to comprehensively test the project. Additionally, the CI host
machines are constrained in their features and memory limits,
preventing us from testing features that are only relevant on large
amounts of data (10GB or more) or functionality that requires a
CUDA-enabled GPU.

Organizations that contribute to Apache Arrow are working on physical
build infrastructure and tools to improve build times and build
scalability. One such new tool is `ursabot`, a GitHub-enabled bot
that can be used to trigger builds either on physical build or in the
cloud. It can also be used to trigger benchmark timing comparisons. If
you are contributing to the project, you may see Ursabot being
employed to trigger tests in pull requests.

To help assist with migrating away from Travis CI, we are also working
to make as many of our builds reproducible with Docker and not reliant
on Travis CI-specific configuration details. This will also help
contributors reproduce build failures locally without having to wait
for Travis CI.

## Columnar Format Notes

* User-defined "extension" types have been formalized in the Arrow
  format, enabling library users to embed custom data types in the
  Arrow columnar format. Initial support is available in C++, Java,
  and Python.
* A new Duration logical type was added to represent absolute lengths
  of time.

## Arrow Flight notes

Flight now supports many of the features of a complete RPC
framework.

* Authentication APIs are now supported across all languages (ARROW-5137)
* Encrypted communication using OpenSSL is supported (ARROW-5643,
  ARROW-5529)
* Clients can specify timeouts on remote calls (ARROW-5136)
* On the protocol level, endpoints are now identified with URIs, to
  support an open-ended number of potential transports (including TLS
  and Unix sockets, and perhaps even non-gRPC-based transports in the
  future) (ARROW-4651)
* Application-defined metadata can be sent alongside data (ARROW-4626,
  ARROW-4627).

Windows is now a supported platform for Flight in C++ and Python
(ARROW-3294), and Python wheels are shipped for all languages
(ARROW-3150, ARROW-5656). C++, Python, and Java have been brought to
parity, now that actions can return streaming results in Java
(ARROW-5254).

## C++ notes

188 resolved issues related to the C++ implementation, so we summarize
some of the work here.

### General platform improvements

* A FileSystem abstraction (ARROW-767) has been added, which paves the
  way for a future Arrow Datasets library allowing to access sharded
  data on arbitrary storage systems, including remote or cloud
  storage. A first draft of the Datasets API was committed in
  ARROW-5512. Right now, this comes with no implementation, but we
  expect to slowly build it up in the coming weeks or months. Early
  feedback is welcome on this API.
* The dictionary API has been reworked in ARROW-3144. The dictionary
  values used to be tied to the DictionaryType instance, which ended
  up too inflexible. Since dictionary-encoding is more often an
  optimization than a semantic property of the data, we decided to
  move the dictionary values to the ArrayData structure, making it
  natural for dictionary-encoded arrays to share the same DataType
  instance, regardless of the encoding details.
* The FixedSizeList and Map types have been implemented, including in
  integration tests. The Map type is akin to a List of Struct(key,
  value) entries, but making it explicit that the underlying data has
  key-value mapping semantics. Also, map entries are always non-null.
* A `Result<T>` class has been introduced in ARROW-4800. The aim is to
  allow to return an error as w ell as a function's logical result
  without resorting to pointer-out arguments.
* The Parquet C++ library has been refactored to use common Arrow IO
  classes for improved C++ platform interoperability.

### Line-delimited JSON reader

A multithreaded line-delimited JSON reader (powered internally by
RapidJSON) is now available for use (also in Python and R via
bindings) . This will likely be expanded to support more kinds of JSON
storage in the future.

### New computational kernels

A number of new computational kernels have been developed

* Compare filter for logical comparisons yielding boolean arrays
* Filter kernel for selecting elements of an input array according to
  a boolean selection array.
* Take kernel, which selects elements by integer index, has been
  expanded to support nested types

## C# Notes

The native C# implementation has continued to mature since 0.13. This
release includes a number of performance, memory use, and usability
improvements.

## Go notes

Go's support for the Arrow columnar format continues to expand. Go now
supports reading and writing the Arrow columnar binary protocol, and
it has also been **added to the cross language integration
tests**. There are now four languages (C++, Go, Java, and JavaScript)
included in our integration tests to verify cross-language
interoperability.

## Java notes

* Support for referencing arbitrary memory using `ArrowBuf` has been
  implemented, paving the way for memory map support in Java
* A number of performance improvements around vector value access were
  added (see ARROW-5264, ARROW-5290).
* The Map type has been implemented in Java and integration tested
  with C++
* Several microbenchmarks have been added and improved.  Including a
  significant speed-up of zeroing out buffers.
* A new algorithms package has been started to contain reference
  implementations of common algorithms.  The initial contribution is
  for Array/Vector sorting.

## JavaScript Notes

A new incremental [array builder API][4] is available.

## MATLAB Notes

Version 0.14.0 features improved Feather file support in the MEX bindings.

## Python notes

* We fixed a problem with the Python wheels causing the Python wheels
  to be much larger in 0.13.0 than they were in 0.12.0. Since the
  introduction of LLVM into our build toolchain, the wheels are going
  to still be significantly bigger. We are interested in approaches to
  enable pyarrow to be installed in pieces with pip or conda rather
  than monolithically.
* It is now possible to define ExtensionTypes with a Python
  implementation (ARROW-840). Those ExtensionTypes can survive a
  roundtrip through C++ and serialization.
* The Flight improvements highlighted above (see C++ notes) are all
  available from Python. Furthermore, Flight is now bundled in our
  binary wheels and conda packages for Linux, Windows and macOS
  (ARROW-3150, ARROW-5656).
* We will build "manylinux2010" binary wheels for Linux systems, in
  addition to "manylinux1" wheels (ARROW-2461). Manylinux2010 is a
  newer standard for more recent systems, with less limiting toolchain
  constraints. Installing manylinux2010 wheels requires an up-to-date
  version of pip.
* Various bug fixes for CSV reading in Python and C++ including the
  ability to parse Decimal(x, y) columns.

### Parquet improvements

* Column statistics for logical types like unicode strings, unsigned
  integers, and timestamps are casted to compatible Python types (see
  ARROW-4139)
* It's now possible to configure "data page" sizes when writing a file
  from Python

## Ruby and C GLib notes

The GLib and Ruby bindings have been tracking features in the C++
project. This release includes bindings for Gandiva, JSON reader, and
other C++ features.

## Rust notes

There is ongoing work in Rust happening on Parquet file support,
computational kernels, and the DataFusion query engine. See the full
changelog for details.

## R notes

We have been working on build and packaging for R so that community
members can hopefully release the project to CRAN in the near
future. Feature development for R has continued to follow the upstream
C++ project.

## Community Discussions Ongoing

There are a number of active discussions ongoing on the developer
dev@arrow.apache.org mailing list. We look forward to hearing from the
community there:

* [Timing and scope of 1.0.0 release][15]
* [Solutions to increase continuous integration capacity][13]
* [A proposal for versioning and forward/backward compatibility
  guarantees for the 1.0.0 release][8] was shared, not much discussion has
  occurred yet.
* [Addressing possible unaligned access and undefined behavior concerns][9]
  in the Arrow binary protocol
* [Supporting smaller than 128-bit encoding of fixed width decimals][10]
* [Forking the Avro C++ implementation][11] so as to adapt it to Arrow's
  needs
* [Sparse representation and compression in Arrow][12]
* [Flight extensions: middleware API and generalized Put operations][14]

[1]: https://issues.apache.org/jira/issues/?jql=project%20%3D%20ARROW%20AND%20status%20%3D%20Resolved%20AND%20fixVersion%20%3D%200.13.0
[2]: https://arrow.apache.org/release/0.14.0.html#contributors
[3]: https://arrow.apache.org/release/0.14.0.html
[4]: https://github.com/apache/arrow/tree/master/js/src/builder
[5]: https://github.com/nevi-me
[6]: https://github.com/fsaintjacques
[7]: https://github.com/praveenbingo
[8]: https://lists.apache.org/thread.html/5715a4d402c835d22d929a8069c5c0cf232077a660ee98639d544af8@%3Cdev.arrow.apache.org%3E
[9]: https://lists.apache.org/thread.html/8440be572c49b7b2ffb76b63e6d935ada9efd9c1c2021369b6d27786@%3Cdev.arrow.apache.org%3E
[10]: https://lists.apache.org/thread.html/31b00086c2991104bd71fb1a2173f32b4a2f569d8e7b5b41e836f3a3@%3Cdev.arrow.apache.org%3E
[11]: https://lists.apache.org/thread.html/97d78112ab583eecb155a7d78342c1063df65d64ec3ccfa0b18737c3@%3Cdev.arrow.apache.org%3E
[12]: https://lists.apache.org/thread.html/a99124e57c14c3c9ef9d98f3c80cfe1dd25496bf3ff7046778add937@%3Cdev.arrow.apache.org%3E
[13]: https://lists.apache.org/thread.html/96b2e22606e8a7b0ad7dc4aae16f232724d1059b34636676ed971d40@%3Cdev.arrow.apache.org%3E
[14]: https://lists.apache.org/thread.html/82a7c026ad18dbe9fdbcffa3560979aff6fd86dd56a49f40d9cfb46e@%3Cdev.arrow.apache.org%3E
[15]: https://lists.apache.org/thread.html/44a7a3d256ab5dbd62da6fe45b56951b435697426bf4adedb6520907@%3Cdev.arrow.apache.org%3E
