---
layout: post
title: "Apache Arrow 0.13.0 Release"
date: "2019-04-01 07:00:00 -0600"
author: wesm
categories: [release]
---
<!--
{% comment %}
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

The Apache Arrow team is pleased to announce the 0.13.0 release. This is the
covers more than 2 months of development work and includes [**550 resolved
issues**][1] from [**81 distinct contributors**][22].

See the [Install Page][2] to learn how to get the libraries for your
platform. The [complete changelog][3] is also available.

While it's a large release, this post will give some brief highlights in the
project since the 0.12.0 release from January.

## New committer and PMC member

The Arrow team is growing! Since the 0.12.0 release we have increased the size
of our committer and PMC rosters.

* [Andy Grove][13] was promoted to PMC member
* [Micah Kornfield][14] was added as a committer

Thank you for all your contributions!

## Rust DataFusion Query Engine donation

Since the last release, we received a donation of [DataFusion][17], a
Rust-native query engine for the Arrow columnar format, whose development had
been led prior by Andy grove. [Read more about DataFusion][19] in our February
blog post.

This is an exciting development for the Rust community, and we look forward to
developing more analytical query processing within the Apache Arrow project.

## Arrow Flight gRPC progress

Over the last couple months, we have made significant progress on Arrow Flight,
an Arrow-native data messaging framework. We have have integration tests to
check C++ and Java compatibility, an we have added Python bindings for the C++
library. We will write a future blog post to go into more detail about how
Flight works.

## C++ CMake Revamp

We have undertaken a significant reworking of our CMake build system for C++ to
make the third party dependencies more configurable. Read more about this in
the [C++ developer documentation][18].

## Java improvements

* Migration to Java 8 date and time APIs from Joda

## Python developments

* Improved pandas serialization performance with RangeIndex
* The Gandiva LLVM expression compiler is now available in the Python wheels
  through the ``pyarrow.gandiva`` module.

## Rust developments

* Writing CSV files
* Parquet support

## R development progress

The Arrow R developers have expanded the scope of the R language bindings and
additionally worked on packaging support to be able to submit the package to
CRAN in the near future.

[We wrote in January about ongoing work][50] to accelerate R work on Apache Spark
using Arrow.

## Community Discussions Ongoing

* **Benchmarking**: we are working to create tools for tracking all of our
  benchmark results on a commit-by-commit basis in a centralized database
  schema so that we can monitor for performance regressions over time. We hope
  to develop a publicly viewable benchmark result dashboard.

## C++ notes

* Beginning to lay more groundwork for an Arrow-native in-memory query engine

Much of the C++ development work the last 3 months concerned internal code
refactoring and performance improvements. Some user-visible highlights of note:

* Experimental support for [in-memory sparse tensors (or ndarrays)][21], with
  support for zero-copy IPC
* Support for building on Alpine Linux
* Significantly improved hash table utilities, with improved hash table
  performance in many parts of the library
* IO library improvements for both read and write buffering
* A fast [trie implementation][20] for string searching
* Many improvements to the parallel CSV reader in performance and features. See
  the changelog

Since the LLVM-based Gandiva expression compiler was donated to Apache Arrow
during the last release cycle, development there has been moving along. We
expect to have Windows support for Gandiva and to ship this in downstream
packages (like Python) in the 0.13 release time frame.

## Go notes

The Arrow Go development team has been expanding. The Go library has gained
support for many missing features from the columnar format as well as semantic
constructs like chunked arrays and tables that are used heavily in the C++
project.

## GLib and Ruby notes

Development of the GLib-based C bindings and corresponding Ruby interfaces have
advanced in lock-step with the C++, Python, and R libraries. In this release,
there are many new features in C and Ruby:

* Compressed file read/write support
* Support for using the C++ parallel CSV reader
* Feather file support
* Gandiva bindings
* Plasma bindings

## Python notes

We fixed a ton of bugs and made many improvements throughout the Python
project. Some highlights from the Python side include:

* Python 3.7 support: wheels and conda packages are now available for Python
  3.7
* Substantially improved memory use when converting strings types to pandas
  format, including when reading Parquet files. Parquet users should notice
  significantly lower memory use in common use cases
* Support for reading and writing compressed files, can be used for CSV files,
  IPC, or any other form of IO
* The new `pyarrow.input_stream` and `pyarrow.output_stream` functions support
  read and write buffering. This is analogous to `BufferedIOBase` from the
  Python standard library, but the internals are implemented natively in C++.
* Gandiva (LLVM expression compiler) bindings, though not yet available in
  pip/conda yet. Look for this in 0.13.0.
* Many improvements to Arrow CUDA integration, including interoperability with
  Numba

## R notes

The R library made huge progress in 0.12, with work led by new committer Romain
Francois. The R project's features are not far behind the Python library, and
we are hoping to be able to make the R library available to CRAN users for use
with Apache Spark or for reading and writing Parquet files over the next
quarter.

Users of the `feather` R library will see significant speed increases in many
cases when reading Feather files with the new Arrow R library.

## Rust notes

Rust development had an active last 3 months; see the changelog for details.

A native Rust implementation was just donated to the project, and the community
intends to provide a similar level of functionality for reading and writing
Parquet files using the Arrow in-memory columnar format as an intermediary.

## Upcoming Roadmap, Outlook for 2019

Apache Arrow has become a large, diverse open source project. It is now being
used in dozens of downstream open source and commercial projects. Work will be
proceeding in many areas in 2019:

* Development of in-memory query execution engines (e.g. in C++, Rust)
* Expanded support for reading and writing the Apache Parquet format, and other
  common data formats like Apache Avro, CSV, JSON, and Apache ORC.
* New Flight RPC system for fast messaging of Arrow datasets
* Expanded support in existing programming languages
* New programming language bindings or native implementations

It promises to be an exciting 2019. We look forward to having you involved in
the development community.

[1]: https://issues.apache.org/jira/issues/?jql=project%20%3D%20ARROW%20AND%20status%20%3D%20Resolved%20AND%20fixVersion%20%3D%200.13.0
[2]: https://arrow.apache.org/install
[3]: https://arrow.apache.org/release/0.13.0.html
[13]: https://github.com/andygrove
[14]: https://github.com/emkornfield
[17]: http://incubator.apache.org/ip-clearance/arrow-rust-datafusion.html
[18]: https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/docs/source/developers/cpp.rst#build-dependency-management
[19]: http://arrow.apache.org/blog/2019/02/04/datafusion-donation/
[20]: https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/cpp/src/arrow/util/trie.h
[21]: https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/cpp/src/arrow/sparse_tensor.h
[22]: https://arrow.apache.org/release/0.13.0.html#contributors
[23]: https://arrow.apache.org/install/
[50]: http://arrow.apache.org/blog/2019/01/25/r-spark-improvements/