.. Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
.. or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
.. distributed with this work for additional information
.. regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
.. to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
.. "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
.. with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

..   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

.. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
.. software distributed under the License is distributed on an
.. "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
.. KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
.. specific language governing permissions and limitations
.. under the License.

.. _format_integration_testing:

Integration Testing
===================

To ensure Arrow implementations are interoperable between each other,
the Arrow project includes cross-language integration tests which are
regularly run as Continuous Integration tasks.

The integration tests exercise compliance with several Arrow specifications:
the :ref:`IPC format <format-ipc>`, the :ref:`Flight RPC <flight-rpc>` protocol,
and the :ref:`C Data Interface <c-data-interface>`.

Strategy
--------

Our strategy for integration testing between Arrow implementations is:

* Test datasets are specified in a custom human-readable,
  :ref:`JSON-based format <format_json_integration>` designed exclusively
  for Arrow's integration tests.

* The JSON files are generated by the integration test harness. Different
  files are used to represent different data types and features, such as
  numerics, lists, dictionary encoding, etc. This makes it easier to pinpoint
  incompatibilities than if all data types were represented in a single file.

* Each implementation provides entry points capable of converting
  between the JSON and the Arrow in-memory representation, and of exposing
  Arrow in-memory data using the desired format.

* Each format (whether Arrow IPC, Flight or the C Data Interface) is tested for
  all supported pairs of (producer, consumer) implementations. The producer
  typically reads a JSON file, converts it to in-memory Arrow data, and exposes
  this data using the format under test. The consumer reads the data in the
  said format and converts it back to Arrow in-memory data; it also reads
  the same JSON file as the producer, and validates that both datasets are
  identical.

Example: IPC format
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Let's say we are testing Arrow C++ as a producer and Arrow Java as a consumer
of the Arrow IPC format. Testing a JSON file would go as follows:

#. A C++ executable reads the JSON file, converts it into Arrow in-memory data
   and writes an Arrow IPC file (the file paths are typically given on the command
   line).

#. A Java executable reads the JSON file, converts it into Arrow in-memory data;
   it also reads the Arrow IPC file generated by C++. Finally, it validates that
   both Arrow in-memory datasets are equal.

Example: C Data Interface
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now, let's say we are testing Arrow Go as a producer and Arrow C# as a consumer
of the Arrow C Data Interface.

#. The integration testing harness allocates a C
   :ref:`ArrowArray <c-data-interface-struct-defs>` structure on the heap.

#. A Go in-process entrypoint (for example a C-compatible function call)
   reads a JSON file and exports one of its :term:`record batches <record batch>`
   into the ``ArrowArray`` structure.

#. A C# in-process entrypoint reads the same JSON file, converts the
   same record batch into Arrow in-memory data; it also imports the
   record batch exported by Arrow Go in the ``ArrowArray`` structure.
   It validates that both record batches are equal, and then releases the
   imported record batch.

#. Depending on the implementation languages' abilities, the integration
   testing harness may assert that memory consumption remained identical
   (i.e., that the exported record batch didn't leak).

#. At the end, the integration testing harness deallocates the ``ArrowArray``
   structure.

.. _running_integration_tests:

Running integration tests
-------------------------

The integration test data generator and runner are implemented inside
the :ref:`Archery <archery>` utility. You need to install the ``integration``
component of archery:

.. code:: console

   $ pip install -e "dev/archery[integration]"

The integration tests are run using the ``archery integration`` command.

.. code-block:: console

   $ archery integration --help

In order to run integration tests, you'll first need to build each component
you want to include. See the respective developer docs for C++, Java, etc.
for instructions on building those.

Some languages may require additional build options to enable integration
testing. For C++, for example, you need to add ``-DARROW_BUILD_INTEGRATION=ON``
to your cmake command.

Depending on which components you have built, you can enable and add them to
the archery test run. For example, if you only have the C++ project built
and want to run the Arrow IPC integration tests, run:

.. code-block:: shell

   archery integration --run-ipc --with-cpp=1

For Java, it may look like:

.. code-block:: shell

   VERSION=14.0.0-SNAPSHOT
   export ARROW_JAVA_INTEGRATION_JAR=$JAVA_DIR/tools/target/arrow-tools-$VERSION-jar-with-dependencies.jar
   archery integration --run-ipc --with-cpp=1 --with-java=1

To run all tests, including Flight and C Data Interface integration tests, do:

.. code-block:: shell

   archery integration --with-all --run-flight --run-ipc --run-c-data

Note that we run these tests in continuous integration, and the CI job uses
docker-compose. You may also run the docker-compose job locally, or at least
refer to it if you have questions about how to build other languages or enable
certain tests.

See :ref:`docker-builds` for more information about the project's
``docker-compose`` configuration.

.. _format_json_integration:

JSON test data format
---------------------

A JSON representation of Arrow columnar data is provided for
cross-language integration testing purposes.
This representation is `not canonical <https://lists.apache.org/thread.html/6947fb7666a0f9cc27d9677d2dad0fb5990f9063b7cf3d80af5e270f%40%3Cdev.arrow.apache.org%3E>`_
but it provides a human-readable way of verifying language implementations.

See `here <https://github.com/apache/arrow/tree/main/docs/source/format/integration_json_examples>`_
for some examples of this JSON data.

.. can we check in more examples, e.g. from the generated_*.json test files?

The high level structure of a JSON integration test files is as follows:

**Data file** ::

    {
      "schema": /*Schema*/,
      "batches": [ /*RecordBatch*/ ],
      "dictionaries": [ /*DictionaryBatch*/ ],
    }

All files contain ``schema`` and ``batches``, while ``dictionaries`` is only
present if there are dictionary type fields in the schema.

**Schema** ::

    {
      "fields" : [
        /* Field */
      ],
      "metadata" : /* Metadata */
    }

**Field** ::

    {
      "name" : "name_of_the_field",
      "nullable" : /* boolean */,
      "type" : /* Type */,
      "children" : [ /* Field */ ],
      "dictionary": {
        "id": /* integer */,
        "indexType": /* Type */,
        "isOrdered": /* boolean */
      },
      "metadata" : /* Metadata */
    }

The ``dictionary`` attribute is present if and only if the ``Field`` corresponds to a
dictionary type, and its ``id`` maps onto a column in the ``DictionaryBatch``. In this
case the ``type`` attribute describes the value type of the dictionary.

For primitive types, ``children`` is an empty array.

**Metadata** ::

    null |
    [ {
      "key": /* string */,
      "value": /* string */
    } ]

A key-value mapping of custom metadata. It may be omitted or null, in which case it is
considered equivalent to ``[]`` (no metadata). Duplicated keys are not forbidden here.

**Type**: ::

    {
      "name" : "null|struct|list|largelist|listview|largelistview|fixedsizelist|union|int|floatingpoint|utf8|largeutf8|binary|largebinary|utf8view|binaryview|fixedsizebinary|bool|decimal|date|time|timestamp|interval|duration|map|runendencoded"
    }

A ``Type`` will have other fields as defined in
`Schema.fbs <https://github.com/apache/arrow/tree/main/format/Schema.fbs>`_
depending on its name.

Int: ::

    {
      "name" : "int",
      "bitWidth" : /* integer */,
      "isSigned" : /* boolean */
    }

FloatingPoint: ::

    {
      "name" : "floatingpoint",
      "precision" : "HALF|SINGLE|DOUBLE"
    }

FixedSizeBinary: ::

    {
      "name" : "fixedsizebinary",
      "byteWidth" : /* byte width */
    }

Decimal: ::

    {
      "name" : "decimal",
      "precision" : /* integer */,
      "scale" : /* integer */
    }

Timestamp: ::

    {
      "name" : "timestamp",
      "unit" : "$TIME_UNIT",
      "timezone": "$timezone"
    }

``$TIME_UNIT`` is one of ``"SECOND|MILLISECOND|MICROSECOND|NANOSECOND"``

"timezone" is an optional string.

Duration: ::

    {
      "name" : "duration",
      "unit" : "$TIME_UNIT"
    }

Date: ::

    {
      "name" : "date",
      "unit" : "DAY|MILLISECOND"
    }

Time: ::

    {
      "name" : "time",
      "unit" : "$TIME_UNIT",
      "bitWidth": /* integer: 32 or 64 */
    }

Interval: ::

    {
      "name" : "interval",
      "unit" : "YEAR_MONTH|DAY_TIME"
    }

Union: ::

    {
      "name" : "union",
      "mode" : "SPARSE|DENSE",
      "typeIds" : [ /* integer */ ]
    }

The ``typeIds`` field in ``Union`` are the codes used to denote which member of
the union is active in each array slot. Note that in general these discriminants are not identical
to the index of the corresponding child array.

List: ::

    {
      "name": "list"
    }

The type that the list is a "list of" will be included in the ``Field``'s
"children" member, as a single ``Field`` there. For example, for a list of
``int32``, ::

    {
      "name": "list_nullable",
      "type": {
        "name": "list"
      },
      "nullable": true,
      "children": [
        {
          "name": "item",
          "type": {
            "name": "int",
            "isSigned": true,
            "bitWidth": 32
          },
          "nullable": true,
          "children": []
        }
      ]
    }

FixedSizeList: ::

    {
      "name": "fixedsizelist",
      "listSize": /* integer */
    }

This type likewise comes with a length-1 "children" array.

Struct: ::

    {
      "name": "struct"
    }

The ``Field``'s "children" contains an array of ``Fields`` with meaningful
names and types.

Map: ::

    {
      "name": "map",
      "keysSorted": /* boolean */
    }

The ``Field``'s "children" contains a single ``struct`` field, which itself
contains 2 children, named "key" and "value".

Null: ::

    {
      "name": "null"
    }

RunEndEncoded: ::

    {
      "name": "runendencoded"
    }

The ``Field``'s "children" should be exactly two child fields. The first
child must be named "run_ends", be non-nullable and be either an ``int16``,
``int32``, or ``int64`` type field. The second child must be named "values",
but can be of any type.

Extension types are, as in the IPC format, represented as their underlying
storage type plus some dedicated field metadata to reconstruct the extension
type.  For example, assuming a "uuid" extension type backed by a
FixedSizeBinary(16) storage, here is how a "uuid" field would be represented::

    {
      "name" : "name_of_the_field",
      "nullable" : /* boolean */,
      "type" : {
         "name" : "fixedsizebinary",
         "byteWidth" : 16
      },
      "children" : [],
      "metadata" : [
         {"key": "ARROW:extension:name", "value": "uuid"},
         {"key": "ARROW:extension:metadata", "value": "uuid-serialized"}
      ]
    }

**RecordBatch**::

    {
      "count": /* integer number of rows */,
      "columns": [ /* FieldData */ ]
    }

**DictionaryBatch**::

    {
      "id": /* integer */,
      "data": [ /* RecordBatch */ ]
    }

**FieldData**::

    {
      "name": "field_name",
      "count" "field_length",
      "$BUFFER_TYPE": /* BufferData */
      ...
      "$BUFFER_TYPE": /* BufferData */
      "children": [ /* FieldData */ ]
    }

The "name" member of a ``Field`` in the ``Schema`` corresponds to the "name"
of a ``FieldData`` contained in the "columns" of a ``RecordBatch``.
For nested types (list, struct, etc.), ``Field``'s "children" each have a
"name" that corresponds to the "name" of a ``FieldData`` inside the
"children" of that ``FieldData``.
For ``FieldData`` inside of a ``DictionaryBatch``, the "name" field does not
correspond to anything.

Here ``$BUFFER_TYPE`` is one of ``VALIDITY``, ``OFFSET`` (for
variable-length types, such as strings and lists), ``TYPE_ID`` (for unions),
or ``DATA``.

``BufferData`` is encoded based on the type of buffer:

* ``VALIDITY``: a JSON array of 1 (valid) and 0 (null). Data for non-nullable
  ``Field`` still has a ``VALIDITY`` array, even though all values are 1.
* ``OFFSET``: a JSON array of integers for 32-bit offsets or
  string-formatted integers for 64-bit offsets.
* ``TYPE_ID``: a JSON array of integers.
* ``DATA``: a JSON array of encoded values.
* ``VARIADIC_DATA_BUFFERS``: a JSON array of data buffers represented as
  hex encoded strings.
* ``VIEWS``: a JSON array of encoded views, which are JSON objects with:
  * ``SIZE``: an integer indicating the size of the view,
  * ``INLINED``: an encoded value (this field will be present if ``SIZE``
    is smaller than 12, otherwise the next three fields will be present),
  * ``PREFIX_HEX``: the first four bytes of the view encoded as hex,
  * ``BUFFER_INDEX``: the index in ``VARIADIC_DATA_BUFFERS`` of the buffer
    viewed,
  * ``OFFSET``: the offset in the buffer viewed.

The value encoding for ``DATA`` is different depending on the logical
type:

* For boolean type: an array of 1 (true) and 0 (false).
* For integer-based types (including timestamps): an array of JSON numbers.
* For 64-bit integers: an array of integers formatted as JSON strings,
  so as to avoid loss of precision.
* For floating point types: an array of JSON numbers. Values are limited
  to 3 decimal places to avoid loss of precision.
* For binary types, an array of uppercase hex-encoded strings, so as
  to represent arbitrary binary data.
* For UTF-8 string types, an array of JSON strings.

For "list" and "largelist" types, ``BufferData`` has ``VALIDITY`` and
``OFFSET``, and the rest of the data is inside "children". These child
``FieldData`` contain all of the same attributes as non-child data, so in
the example of a list of ``int32``, the child data has ``VALIDITY`` and
``DATA``.

For "fixedsizelist", there is no ``OFFSET`` member because the offsets are
implied by the field's "listSize".

Note that the "count" for these child data may not match the parent "count".
For example, if a ``RecordBatch`` has 7 rows and contains a ``FixedSizeList``
of ``listSize`` 4, then the data inside the "children" of that ``FieldData``
will have count 28.

For "null" type, ``BufferData`` does not contain any buffers.

Archery Integration Test Cases
------------------------------

This list can make it easier to understand what manual testing may need to
be done for any future Arrow Format changes by knowing what cases the automated
integration testing actually tests.

There are two types of integration test cases: the ones populated on the fly
by the data generator in the Archery utility, and *gold* files that exist
in the `arrow-testing <https://github.com/apache/arrow-testing/tree/master/data/arrow-ipc-stream/integration>` 
repository.

Data Generator Tests
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This is the high-level description of the cases which are generated and
tested using the ``archery integration`` command (see ``get_generated_json_files`` 
in ``datagen.py``):

* Primitive Types
  - No Batches
  - Various Primitive Values
  - Batches with Zero Length
  - String and Binary Large offset cases
* Null Type
  * Trivial Null batches
* Decimal128
* Decimal256
* DateTime with various units
* Durations with various units
* Intervals
  - MonthDayNano interval is a separate case
* Map Types
  - Non-Canonical Maps
* Nested Types
  - Lists
  - Structs
  - Lists with Large Offsets
* Unions
* Custom Metadata
* Schemas with Duplicate Field Names
* Dictionary Types
  - Signed indices
  - Unsigned indices
  - Nested dictionaries
* Run end encoded
* Binary view and string view
* List view and large list view
* Extension Types


Gold File Integration Tests
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Pre-generated json and arrow IPC files (both file and stream format) exist
in the `arrow-testing <https://github.com/apache/arrow-testing>`__ repository
in the ``data/arrow-ipc-stream/integration`` directory. These serve as
*gold* files that are assumed to be correct for use in testing. They are 
referenced by ``runner.py`` in the code for the :ref:`Archery <archery>`
utility. Below are the test cases which are covered by them:

* Backwards Compatibility

  - The following cases are tested using the 0.14.1 format:

    + datetime
    + decimals
    + dictionaries
    + intervals
    + maps
    + nested types (list, struct)
    + primitives 
    + primitive with no batches
    + primitive with zero length batches

  - The following is tested for 0.17.1 format:

    + unions

* Endianness

  - The following cases are tested with both Little Endian and Big Endian versions for auto conversion

    + custom metadata
    + datetime
    + decimals
    + decimal256
    + dictionaries
    + dictionaries with unsigned indices
    + record batches with duplicate fieldnames
    + extension types
    + interval types
    + map types
    + non-canonical map data
    + nested types (lists, structs)
    + nested dictionaries
    + nested large offset types
    + nulls
    + primitive data
    + large offset binary and strings
    + primitives with no batches included
    + primitive batches with zero length
    + recursive nested types
    + union types

* Compression tests

  - LZ4
  - ZSTD

* Batches with Shared Dictionaries
